+++
title = "Weeknotes: 3"
author = ["Balaji Sivaraman"]
date = "2021-12-05"
categories = [
  "Weeknotes (2021)"
]
tags = [
  "Weeknotes"
]
share = "false"
type = "post"
+++

Last week's notes were skipped because I was in the middle of helping
my in-laws shift from Coimbatore to Chennai. That hectic move finally
finished this weekend. So expect this week's notes to be light on
content as well. But do read till the end for a lovely surprise.

## Work

I took more than half of the week off for the aforementioned move, so
nothing of interest here, besides the final full-day session of the
technical principal training program on Friday. We all showcased the
artifacts we had put together for the Kata problem statement we were
given. I will be writing a long-form post on the learnings that
resulted from this separately. So do be on the lookout for that.

## Learning

I finally got my hands on the backup Yubikeys in the previous week. I
spent a good amount of time setting it up and getting to know its
capabilities. Right now, it is setup to hold all of the OTPs for
various websites (both for personal and work). I also set it up as an
additional layer of protection for my KeepassXC database.

The latter setup is proving slightly cumbersome especially when I'm
outside and quickly need to open
[Strongbox](https://strongboxsafe.com/) on my mobile to grab a
password. I have a backup Yubikey in my wallet, which is made of
leather. More often than not, NFC on my iPhone SE 2020 is not able to
figure out that my key is inside the wallet forcing me to take it out
and scan it. Due to this reason, I'm not yet convinced that the added
security on my KeepassXC database is worth it.

## Personal

On our penultimate day in Coimbatore, we started hearing a loud
squeaking sound in the house. Knowing neither the source location nor
the type of animal making it, we attributed it to a rat stuck in the
pipes. We continued hearing it on our last day as we were in the final
throes of packing and stuck to the same conclusion.

To our surprise, we heard the same sound as we were unloading in
Chennai. And again, not knowing what it was, we thought it was
probably a rat or something in our new apartment.

It wasn't until the day after we moved into the new apartment that we
discovered the source of the noise and discovered these cutest little
things.

{{< img src="BabySquirrels.png" alt="A box containing the remnants of a squirrel's nest along with three cute month old baby squirrels" >}}

Turns out that their mother had chosen to lay them in a nest in the
compressor of our air conditioner for warmth. Not knowing what was
inside, we removed the compressor unit and packed it along with our
stuff.

We then spent a good amount of time over the weekend feeding them with
milk and slowly nursing them to the best of our limited abilities. We
soon realised that we were in no position to be their permanent
caretakers, especially since we knew nothing about nursing baby
squirrels. With a heavy heart, we bid goodbye to them today afternoon
and handed them over to Blue Cross India. We miss them already, but
also know that they're in a place where people will take good care of
them. And who knows, they will hopefully make a lot of new friends
there.
