+++
title = "Hello,"
date = "2020-09-13"
+++

My name is Balaji Sivaraman, and [I'm a software
developer](https://github.com/balajisivaraman/). Thank you for
visiting my website.

I currently work as a Lead Technologist for
[Thoughtworks](https://www.thoughtworks.com/) where I help clients
from a variety of domains and countries on their digital
transformation journeys.

In my spare time, I enjoy programming and am passionate about
programming languages, especially those that push the boundaries of
modern development practices. This used to be Scala a few years back,
when I got introduced to the strongly-typed functional programming
paradigm. More recently, I have had a keen eye on the
[Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) language and find its blend of
modern language design constructs and memory-safe, systems programming
constructs fascinating. I am a co-organiser of the [Rust Chennai
Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/mad-rs/).

I have a [blog](https://blog.balajisivaraman.com), where I capture my
thoughts on programming, life and everything in-between. I try to keep
it updated on a weekly basis but don't always succeed.

## Work

My current day job (mostly) involves working closely with clients who
are on a digital transformation journey, rewriting their existing
applications using a variety of architectural styles, adhering to
modern Agile development practices, and continuously delivering
business value for them. In this process, I have worked with clients
from a variety of domains and countries, primarily those in the retail
and financial services industries from Italy.

## Contact

You can find me under the handle `balajisivaraman` on most websites.

- [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/balajisivaraman/)
- [GitHub](https://www.github.com/balajisivaraman)
- [Email](mailto:balaji@balajisivaraman.com)

If you wish to contact me securely, [here's my GPG key](gpg-public-key.asc).
