+++
title = "Weeknotes: 1"
author = ["Balaji Sivaraman"]
date = "2021-11-14"
categories = [
  "Weeknotes (2021)"
]
tags = [
  "Weeknotes"
]
share = "false"
type = "post"
+++

Inspired by rifling through barrucadu's
[interesting](https://memo.barrucadu.co.uk/taxon/weeknotes.html) blog,
I have decided to give writing [weeknotes](https://weeknot.es/) a try.

I have never kept a daily diary before and, if I'm being honest,
always found the concept a bit overwhelming. However, going through
barrucadu's weeknotes, I got the sense that they can serve as a good
log of the goings-on in my life. I told myself, "At some point in the
future, I may rifle through my old weeknotes to recollect what was
happening in my life at some point in time." And that thought really
struck a chord with me, so here goes nothing!

## Work

Due to my work being in the consulting space, I will not be in a
position to share much here on a weekly basis. What I will try to do
is capture the technical work that I did and what I learnt out of that
without divulging client-specific information.

Having said that, the past week was largely uneventful. This has been
the case for the past few weeks. And seeing as we are in the phase of
enhancing a product we have already developed, this is not a huge
surprise.

Besides that, yesterday we had the penultimate meetup of an internal
training program I have been part of for the past 4 months. This
program has been built for cultivating the next line of technical
principals at Thoughtworks. Of the two sessions we had yesterday, the
first was primarily around the challenges faced in scaling large-scale
client engagements. We thoroughly enjoyed the second one where one of
our current technical principals shared their leadership journey in an
intensely personal and thought-provoking session.

## Learning

I finally got around to completing one of the homeworks given to us as
part of the aforementioned training program. It was [this
Udemy](https://www.udemy.com/course/change-management-for-organizations/)
course on Change Management. Having been part of a handful of projects
that I felt didn't reach their potential due to a lack of adoption, I
found the structure presented for managing change by [Vicki
Hart](https://www.vickihart.net/about-us/) to be really
thought-provoking. I have taken a bunch of notes in my personal space,
and I hope to be able to apply the learnings in a future project.

I migrated away from my [Mail in a Box](https://mailinabox.email/)
setup to [Protonmail](https://protonmail.com/). I find not having to
manage my own mail server strangely invigorating. As part of the
process, I also setup my entire website (including this blog) on a
NixOS VPS on Linode. I will capture this experience as part of a
separate blog sometime soon.

## Gaming

For the first time in almost 2-3 years, I finally got around to gaming
on my PC. I really cannot say how this happened. I had been
binge-watching gaming videos on Youtube over the past couple of weeks,
starting with Beaglerush's [Live and Impossible
Series](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLXctaw5JGF4Inwdinw7ijDafjKlVC2oDo)
to Gameranx's [Gaming
Lists](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLJAzFcYKyx4Ssai8iY2ICMFcRPa0LVom_), so that's one possible explanation.

In any case, I installed and played a bit of X-Com: Enemy Within
([Long War Rebalance](https://www.nexusmods.com/xcom/mods/686)),
Invisible Inc, Into the Breach, and Ori and the Blind Forest. I got my
butt handed to me in both Invisible Inc and Into the Breach, having to
restart my campaigns multiple times in both games; although I greatly
enjoyed the experience. But I spent the most amount of time with Ori
and the Blind Forest, which I played for my spouse who loved the
cuteness of Ori.
